INSTALL2.md, before:

* 6GB RAM, 2 CPUs
* 100GB of disk (70GB for `/`, 2GB for `/boot`)
* installation with default configuration "Ubuntu Server"
* install openssh server
* hostname wikisrv

## Installation of Docker
Following the official installation instructions
https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/ubuntu/

Remove conflicting packages:
```
sudo apt remove $(dpkg --get-selections docker.io docker-compose docker-compose-v2 docker-doc podman-docker containerd runc | cut -f1)
```

Before we begin, let's upgrade all installed packages:
```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade
```

From the docker installation instructions
```
# Add Docker's official GPG key:
sudo apt update
sudo apt install ca-certificates curl
sudo install -m 0755 -d /etc/apt/keyrings
sudo curl -fsSL https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu/gpg -o /etc/apt/keyrings/docker.asc
sudo chmod a+r /etc/apt/keyrings/docker.asc

# Add the repository to Apt sources:
sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/docker.sources <<EOF
Types: deb
URIs: https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu
Suites: $(. /etc/os-release && echo "${UBUNTU_CODENAME:-$VERSION_CODENAME}")
Components: stable
Signed-By: /etc/apt/keyrings/docker.asc
EOF

sudo apt update
```

```
sudo apt install docker-ce docker-ce-cli containerd.io docker-buildx-plugin docker-compose-plugin
```

```
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo docker run hello-world
```

Optional:
add user to group docker to run without sudo



```
cl@wikisrv:~$ mkdir work
cl@wikisrv:~$ cd work
cl@wikisrv:~/work$ git clone https://github.com/christoph-lechner/wiki-eventstreamer.git
Cloning into 'wiki-eventstreamer'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 947, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (98/98), done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (71/71), done.
remote: Total 947 (delta 40), reused 74 (delta 27), pack-reused 849 (from 1)
Receiving objects: 100% (947/947), 1.95 MiB | 6.16 MiB/s, done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (533/533), done.
cl@wikisrv:~/work$
```

## Preparation of Users
```
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo useradd -m -c "user for wiki data storage" -s /bin/bash wikidata
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo useradd -m -c "user for wiki proj" -s /bin/bash wikiproj
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo useradd -m -c "user for wiki proj DB" -s /bin/bash wikipg
```
```
cl@wikisrv:~$ id wikidata
uid=1001(wikidata) gid=1001(wikidata) groups=1001(wikidata)
cl@wikisrv:~$ id wikiproj
uid=1002(wikiproj) gid=1002(wikiproj) groups=1002(wikiproj)
cl@wikisrv:~$ id wikipg
uid=1003(wikipg) gid=1003(wikipg) groups=1003(wikipg)
```


## Preparation of PostgreSQL DB
```
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo mkdir /srv/postgres-data-wiki
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo chown wikipg:wikipg /srv/postgres-data-wiki/
```

**Modification of docker-compose.yaml file for the DB to run with this user**
```
cl@wikisrv:~/work/wiki-eventstreamer/db$ id wikipg
uid=1003(wikipg) gid=1003(wikipg) groups=1003(wikipg)
```

**DB config: git commit ID ac71132**

The default passwords for postgres and pgadmin need to be changed. Note that the default password for postgres in docker-compose.yaml is only effective for the first time when the DB is initialized.



```
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres> CREATE USER wikiproj WITH PASSWORD 'your_password';
CREATE ROLE
Time: 0.023s
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres> CREATE DATABASE wikidb OWNER wikidb;
role "wikidb" does not exist
Time: 0.026s
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres> CREATE DATABASE wikidb OWNER wikiproj;
CREATE DATABASE
Time: 0.114s
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres>
```
Verify that we can connect as `wikiproj` to the `wikidb` and that we can create a simple table there (and insert a row).

```
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres> CREATE USER wikiproj_ro WITH PASSWORD 'your_ro_password';
CREATE ROLE
Time: 0.023s
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres> GRANT CONNECT ON DATABASE wikidb TO wikiproj_ro;
GRANT
Time: 0.016s
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres> \c wikidb
You are now connected to database "wikidb" as user "postgres"
Time: 0.075s
postgres@127.0.0.1:wikidb> GRANT USAGE ON SCHEMA public TO wikiproj_ro;
GRANT
Time: 0.015s
postgres@127.0.0.1:wikidb> GRANT SELECT ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA public TO wikiproj_ro;
GRANT
Time: 0.016s
postgres@127.0.0.1:wikidb>
```
Above commands granted SELECT permission to `wikiproj_ro` on all tables that are already existing in database `wikidb`. What is still missing is adjusting the permissions for tables that will be created in the future.
As `wikiproj` will be creating all the tables in the database `wikidb`, the following command must be executed as user `wikiproj` (**not as superuser 'postgres'**):
```
wikiproj@127.0.0.1:wikidb> ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA public GRANT SELECT ON 
 TABLES TO wikiproj_ro;
You're about to run a destructive command.
Do you want to proceed? [y/N]: y
Your call!
ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES
Time: 0.020s
wikiproj@127.0.0.1:wikidb>
```

### Database Schema
```
CREATE TABLE wiki_datafiles(
    filename TEXT UNIQUE,
    file_hash TEXT,
    filename_xferlog TEXT,
    ts_entry_creation TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE DEFAULT NOW(),
    ts_file_transfer TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE,
    ts_load_begin TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE,
    ts_load_end TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE,
    loadstat_events_in_file INT,
    loadstat_events_merged INT,
    ts_file_archive TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE
);
```

```
CREATE TABLE wiki_change_events(
    -- MD5 hash over a few fields, ensures deduplication (data is loaded into this table using MERGE command)
    _h TEXT,
    ts_event_meta_dt TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE,
    event_meta_dt TEXT,
    event_meta_id TEXT,
    event_meta_domain TEXT,
    event_id BIGINT,
    event_type TEXT,
    event_wiki TEXT,
    event_user TEXT,
    event_bot BOOLEAN,
    event_title TEXT,
    UNIQUE(_h,event_wiki)
) PARTITION BY LIST(event_wiki);
CREATE TABLE wiki_change_events_dewiki
	PARTITION OF wiki_change_events
	FOR VALUES IN ('dewiki');
CREATE TABLE wiki_change_events_enwiki
	PARTITION OF wiki_change_events
	FOR VALUES IN ('enwiki');
CREATE TABLE wiki_change_events_hightraffic
	PARTITION OF wiki_change_events
	FOR VALUES IN ('commonswiki','wikidatawiki');
CREATE TABLE wiki_change_events_otherwikis
	PARTITION OF wiki_change_events DEFAULT;
```

```
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW wiki_matview_countsall AS
SELECT
        DATE(ts_event_meta_dt) AS date, EXTRACT(HOUR FROM ts_event_meta_dt) AS hour,event_wiki,
        COALESCE( SUM(1),0 ) AS count_bot_flagignore,
        COALESCE( SUM((CASE WHEN event_bot=TRUE  THEN 1 END)),0 ) AS count_bot_true,
        COALESCE( SUM((CASE WHEN event_bot=FALSE THEN 1 END)),0 ) AS count_bot_false
FROM wiki_change_events
WHERE
        -- the streamreader rotates the stream dumps no at the full hour
        -- -> cut away the final (incomplete) hour
        ts_event_meta_dt<(SELECT DATE_TRUNC('HOUR',MAX(ts_event_meta_dt)) FROM wiki_change_events) 
GROUP BY date,hour,event_wiki
ORDER BY date,hour,event_wiki;

CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW wiki_matview_countsedits AS
SELECT
        DATE(ts_event_meta_dt) AS date, EXTRACT(HOUR FROM ts_event_meta_dt) AS hour,event_wiki,
        COALESCE( SUM(1),0 ) AS count_bot_flagignore,
        COALESCE( SUM((CASE WHEN event_bot=TRUE  THEN 1 END)),0 ) AS count_bot_true,
        COALESCE( SUM((CASE WHEN event_bot=FALSE THEN 1 END)),0 ) AS count_bot_false
FROM wiki_change_events
WHERE
        -- the streamreader rotates the stream dumps no at the full hour
        -- -> cut away the final (incomplete) hour
        ts_event_meta_dt<(SELECT DATE_TRUNC('HOUR',MAX(ts_event_meta_dt)) FROM wiki_change_events)
        AND event_type='edit'
GROUP BY date,hour,event_wiki
ORDER BY date,hour,event_wiki;
```


## Preparation of Apache Airflow
Note that, as pointed out in [the Airflow documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/howto/docker-compose/index.html), **this setup is not suitable for production use.**

### Changes to docker-compose.yaml
Thi directory `import_and-merge/docker-conf/` contains the `docker-compose.yaml` file that can be used to get Airflow running in Docker.
It is based on the file from the Airflow documentation, with a few changes to adopt it to this specific setup. In particular, this includes changes to mount the directory with the production data files (`/srv/wikidata/in`) to `/mnt` inside of the containers.

The additional GID of 1001 is `wikidata`, it is required to have read-only access to data files. Adjust it to match the GID in your setup.

Following the notes in `import_and_merge/docker-conf/README.md`

### Setting up the directory
```
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo mkdir /srv/airflow
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo chown wikiproj:wikiproj /srv/airflow
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo -i
root@wikisrv:~# su - wikiproj
wikiproj@wikisrv:~$ cd /srv/airflow
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$
```

### Preparing the environment
As in the [the Airflow documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/howto/docker-compose/index.html):
```
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ mkdir -p ./dags ./logs ./plugins ./config
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ echo -e "AIRFLOW_UID=$(id -u)" > .env
```
Set up your password:
```
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ chmod 600 .env
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ echo -e "_AIRFLOW_WWW_USER_PASSWORD='Your_Password'" >> .env
```

`docker-compose.yaml` file from 8cb796c

Before running any docker command, this directory should now look like:
```
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ ls -la
total 44
drwxr-xr-x 6 wikiproj wikiproj  4096 Dec 11 15:54 .
drwxr-xr-x 6 root     root      4096 Dec 11 14:55 ..
drwxrwxr-x 2 wikiproj wikiproj  4096 Dec 11 15:54 config
drwxrwxr-x 2 wikiproj wikiproj  4096 Dec 11 15:54 dags
-rw-rw-r-- 1 wikiproj wikiproj 12944 Dec 11 15:53 docker-compose.yaml
-rw------- 1 wikiproj wikiproj    60 Dec 11 15:43 .env
drwxrwxr-x 2 wikiproj wikiproj  4096 Dec 11 15:54 logs
drwxrwxr-x 2 wikiproj wikiproj  4096 Dec 11 15:54 plugins
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$
```

### ONLY THE FIRST TIME: Initialize the database
```
cl@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ sudo docker compose up airflow-init
```
Warning:
```
airflow-init-1  | The container is run as root user. For security, consider using a regular user account.
```
Many messages pop up in the terminal, and finally you see:
```
airflow-init-1 exited with code 0
```

### Starting Airflow
```
cl@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ sudo docker compose up -d
```

In my setup, this takes approx. 2 minutes.

Open the web browser and log in using user `airflow` and the password from the `.env` file. **Note that as this connection is not encrypted, the password and all further information that is entered could be eavesdropped.** 

We arrive at the start screen.
Especially the list of DAGs is still empty:
**insert two screenshots here**

### Adding the DAGs
Let's add the DAGs for this project.

First of all pack the needed files into a tar archive.
```
cl@wikisrv:~/work/wiki-eventstreamer/import_and_merge/airflow_dags$ tar -cf /tmp/airflow_dags.tar .
```

Drop the DAGs into the correct place and check the configuration (file from git commit id ac71132):
```
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow/dags$ tar -xf /tmp/airflow_dags.tar
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow/dags$ cat load_streamdump_cfg.py
from pathlib import Path

def get_cfg():
    cfg = {
        # data directory seen from INSIDE of the Docker container
        'DATADIR': Path('/mnt/'),
        'DB_CONN_ID': 'wikidb',
    }
    return cfg
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow/dags$ ls -l
total 24
-rw-rw-r-- 1 wikiproj wikiproj 1703 Dec 11 12:30 filedb_util.py
-rw-rw-r-- 1 wikiproj wikiproj  206 Dec 11 15:59 load_streamdump_cfg.py
-rw-rw-r-- 1 wikiproj wikiproj 1359 Dec 11 12:30 load_streamdump_finalize.py
-rw-rw-r-- 1 wikiproj wikiproj 3670 Dec 11 12:30 load_streamdump.py
-rw-rw-r-- 1 wikiproj wikiproj 6276 Dec 11 12:30 wikiloader.py
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow/dags$
```

Airflow periodically scans the directories, so after some time Airflow should list them under the menu point DAGs.
**add screenshot**

### Set up the DB connection
The value of `DB_CONN_ID` is the ID of the connection that needs to be defined in Airflow.
In the menu on the left side:
Admin -> Connections
On the top-right "Add Connection".
Enter the name `wikidb` and select connection type "Postgres" (it can take a few seconds until the list in the drop-down menu is prepared).
Again, because we are connected to Airflow via HTTP (and not via HTTPS), all data we enter here could be eavesdropped!
**insert screenshot of form and of status after addition**

This is the only connection needed, in particular no file-system-related connections need to be set up as the current version of the script (as of 2025-Dec) assumes that everything is running on the local filesystem.

### Adjusting the permissions of the data directory
At the data directory was not existing and but was defined as volume in the `docker-compose.yaml` file of Airflow, it was created with owner `root`.

This needs to be adjusted:
```
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo chown wikidata:wikidata /srv/wikidata/in
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo chmod 750 /srv/wikidata/in
cl@wikisrv:~$ ls -ld /srv/wikidata/in
drwxr-x--- 2 wikidata wikidata 4096 Dec 11 14:55 /srv/wikidata/in
cl@wikisrv:~$
```

### Optional: Checking the permission structure for file access
For the data ingestion process to work, it is crucial that the files containing the stream dumps can be accessed from within the Airflow containers.

For this check, let's identify the container running the worker:
```
CONTAINER ID   IMAGE                  COMMAND                  CREATED         STATUS                            PORTS                                              NAMES
5b9002effb13   apache/airflow:3.1.3   "/usr/bin/dumb-init …"   2 minutes ago   Up 6 seconds (health: starting)   8080/tcp                                           airflow-airflow-worker-1
[..]
```

To check the directory mapping: drop a file and then launch a shell inside of one of the running containers
```
cl@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ sudo touch /srv/wikidata/in/hallo
cl@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ sudo docker exec -it airflow-airflow-worker-1 /bin/bash
default@5b9002effb13:/opt/airflow$ id
uid=1002(default) gid=0(root) groups=0(root),1001
default@5b9002effb13:/opt/airflow$ ls -l /mnt/
total 0
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 0 Dec 11 15:37 hallo
default@5b9002effb13:/opt/airflow$
```
As expected, the file that was placed on the host in directory `/srv/wikidata/in` appears inside the container in the path `/mnt` and there is permission to enter the directory.

### x
To check the DB connection without launching any importer DAGs, a new DAG `db_conntest.py` was created while writing this installation guide.
It was dropped into the directory `/srv/airflow/dags`.

You can manually trigger the DAG
** insert screenshot **
and inspect the log to see that everything worked.

To demonstrate what happens if the DB connection does not work, I changed the password in the configuration definition, and then the triggered DAG run fails.
** insert screenshot **

Commit message:

doc: add Airflow screenshots to guide

INSTALL2.md, after:

* 6GB RAM, 2 CPUs
* 100GB of disk (70GB for `/`, 2GB for `/boot`)
* installation with default configuration "Ubuntu Server"
* install openssh server
* hostname wikisrv

## Installation of Docker
Following the official installation instructions
https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/ubuntu/

Remove conflicting packages:
```
sudo apt remove $(dpkg --get-selections docker.io docker-compose docker-compose-v2 docker-doc podman-docker containerd runc | cut -f1)
```

Before we begin, let's upgrade all installed packages:
```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade
```

From the docker installation instructions
```
# Add Docker's official GPG key:
sudo apt update
sudo apt install ca-certificates curl
sudo install -m 0755 -d /etc/apt/keyrings
sudo curl -fsSL https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu/gpg -o /etc/apt/keyrings/docker.asc
sudo chmod a+r /etc/apt/keyrings/docker.asc

# Add the repository to Apt sources:
sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/docker.sources <<EOF
Types: deb
URIs: https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu
Suites: $(. /etc/os-release && echo "${UBUNTU_CODENAME:-$VERSION_CODENAME}")
Components: stable
Signed-By: /etc/apt/keyrings/docker.asc
EOF

sudo apt update
```

```
sudo apt install docker-ce docker-ce-cli containerd.io docker-buildx-plugin docker-compose-plugin
```

```
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo docker run hello-world
```

Optional:
add user to group docker to run without sudo



```
cl@wikisrv:~$ mkdir work
cl@wikisrv:~$ cd work
cl@wikisrv:~/work$ git clone https://github.com/christoph-lechner/wiki-eventstreamer.git
Cloning into 'wiki-eventstreamer'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 947, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (98/98), done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (71/71), done.
remote: Total 947 (delta 40), reused 74 (delta 27), pack-reused 849 (from 1)
Receiving objects: 100% (947/947), 1.95 MiB | 6.16 MiB/s, done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (533/533), done.
cl@wikisrv:~/work$
```

## Preparation of Users
```
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo useradd -m -c "user for wiki data storage" -s /bin/bash wikidata
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo useradd -m -c "user for wiki proj" -s /bin/bash wikiproj
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo useradd -m -c "user for wiki proj DB" -s /bin/bash wikipg
```
```
cl@wikisrv:~$ id wikidata
uid=1001(wikidata) gid=1001(wikidata) groups=1001(wikidata)
cl@wikisrv:~$ id wikiproj
uid=1002(wikiproj) gid=1002(wikiproj) groups=1002(wikiproj)
cl@wikisrv:~$ id wikipg
uid=1003(wikipg) gid=1003(wikipg) groups=1003(wikipg)
```


## Preparation of PostgreSQL DB
```
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo mkdir /srv/postgres-data-wiki
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo chown wikipg:wikipg /srv/postgres-data-wiki/
```

**Modification of docker-compose.yaml file for the DB to run with this user**
```
cl@wikisrv:~/work/wiki-eventstreamer/db$ id wikipg
uid=1003(wikipg) gid=1003(wikipg) groups=1003(wikipg)
```

**DB config: git commit ID ac71132**

The default passwords for postgres and pgadmin need to be changed. Note that the default password for postgres in docker-compose.yaml is only effective for the first time when the DB is initialized.



```
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres> CREATE USER wikiproj WITH PASSWORD 'your_password';
CREATE ROLE
Time: 0.023s
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres> CREATE DATABASE wikidb OWNER wikidb;
role "wikidb" does not exist
Time: 0.026s
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres> CREATE DATABASE wikidb OWNER wikiproj;
CREATE DATABASE
Time: 0.114s
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres>
```
Verify that we can connect as `wikiproj` to the `wikidb` and that we can create a simple table there (and insert a row).

```
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres> CREATE USER wikiproj_ro WITH PASSWORD 'your_ro_password';
CREATE ROLE
Time: 0.023s
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres> GRANT CONNECT ON DATABASE wikidb TO wikiproj_ro;
GRANT
Time: 0.016s
postgres@127.0.0.1:postgres> \c wikidb
You are now connected to database "wikidb" as user "postgres"
Time: 0.075s
postgres@127.0.0.1:wikidb> GRANT USAGE ON SCHEMA public TO wikiproj_ro;
GRANT
Time: 0.015s
postgres@127.0.0.1:wikidb> GRANT SELECT ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA public TO wikiproj_ro;
GRANT
Time: 0.016s
postgres@127.0.0.1:wikidb>
```
Above commands granted SELECT permission to `wikiproj_ro` on all tables that are already existing in database `wikidb`. What is still missing is adjusting the permissions for tables that will be created in the future.
As `wikiproj` will be creating all the tables in the database `wikidb`, the following command must be executed as user `wikiproj` (**not as superuser 'postgres'**):
```
wikiproj@127.0.0.1:wikidb> ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES IN SCHEMA public GRANT SELECT ON 
 TABLES TO wikiproj_ro;
You're about to run a destructive command.
Do you want to proceed? [y/N]: y
Your call!
ALTER DEFAULT PRIVILEGES
Time: 0.020s
wikiproj@127.0.0.1:wikidb>
```

### Database Schema
```
CREATE TABLE wiki_datafiles(
    filename TEXT UNIQUE,
    file_hash TEXT,
    filename_xferlog TEXT,
    ts_entry_creation TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE DEFAULT NOW(),
    ts_file_transfer TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE,
    ts_load_begin TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE,
    ts_load_end TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE,
    loadstat_events_in_file INT,
    loadstat_events_merged INT,
    ts_file_archive TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE
);
```

```
CREATE TABLE wiki_change_events(
    -- MD5 hash over a few fields, ensures deduplication (data is loaded into this table using MERGE command)
    _h TEXT,
    ts_event_meta_dt TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE,
    event_meta_dt TEXT,
    event_meta_id TEXT,
    event_meta_domain TEXT,
    event_id BIGINT,
    event_type TEXT,
    event_wiki TEXT,
    event_user TEXT,
    event_bot BOOLEAN,
    event_title TEXT,
    UNIQUE(_h,event_wiki)
) PARTITION BY LIST(event_wiki);
CREATE TABLE wiki_change_events_dewiki
	PARTITION OF wiki_change_events
	FOR VALUES IN ('dewiki');
CREATE TABLE wiki_change_events_enwiki
	PARTITION OF wiki_change_events
	FOR VALUES IN ('enwiki');
CREATE TABLE wiki_change_events_hightraffic
	PARTITION OF wiki_change_events
	FOR VALUES IN ('commonswiki','wikidatawiki');
CREATE TABLE wiki_change_events_otherwikis
	PARTITION OF wiki_change_events DEFAULT;
```

```
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW wiki_matview_countsall AS
SELECT
        DATE(ts_event_meta_dt) AS date, EXTRACT(HOUR FROM ts_event_meta_dt) AS hour,event_wiki,
        COALESCE( SUM(1),0 ) AS count_bot_flagignore,
        COALESCE( SUM((CASE WHEN event_bot=TRUE  THEN 1 END)),0 ) AS count_bot_true,
        COALESCE( SUM((CASE WHEN event_bot=FALSE THEN 1 END)),0 ) AS count_bot_false
FROM wiki_change_events
WHERE
        -- the streamreader rotates the stream dumps no at the full hour
        -- -> cut away the final (incomplete) hour
        ts_event_meta_dt<(SELECT DATE_TRUNC('HOUR',MAX(ts_event_meta_dt)) FROM wiki_change_events) 
GROUP BY date,hour,event_wiki
ORDER BY date,hour,event_wiki;

CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW wiki_matview_countsedits AS
SELECT
        DATE(ts_event_meta_dt) AS date, EXTRACT(HOUR FROM ts_event_meta_dt) AS hour,event_wiki,
        COALESCE( SUM(1),0 ) AS count_bot_flagignore,
        COALESCE( SUM((CASE WHEN event_bot=TRUE  THEN 1 END)),0 ) AS count_bot_true,
        COALESCE( SUM((CASE WHEN event_bot=FALSE THEN 1 END)),0 ) AS count_bot_false
FROM wiki_change_events
WHERE
        -- the streamreader rotates the stream dumps no at the full hour
        -- -> cut away the final (incomplete) hour
        ts_event_meta_dt<(SELECT DATE_TRUNC('HOUR',MAX(ts_event_meta_dt)) FROM wiki_change_events)
        AND event_type='edit'
GROUP BY date,hour,event_wiki
ORDER BY date,hour,event_wiki;
```


## Preparation of Apache Airflow
Note that, as pointed out in [the Airflow documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/howto/docker-compose/index.html), **this setup is not suitable for production use). inspecting the UID/GID inside the containers, the processes appear to be running with group ID 0.**

### Changes to docker-compose.yaml
Thi directory `import_and-merge/docker-conf/` contains the `docker-compose.yaml` file that can be used to get Airflow running in Docker.
It is based on the file from the Airflow documentation, with a few changes to adopt it to this specific setup. In particular, this includes changes to mount the directory with the production data files (`/srv/wikidata/in`) to `/mnt` inside of the containers.

The additional GID of 1001 is `wikidata`, it is required to have read-only access to data files. Adjust it to match the GID in your setup.

Following the notes in `import_and_merge/docker-conf/README.md`

### Setting up the directory
```
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo mkdir /srv/airflow
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo chown wikiproj:wikiproj /srv/airflow
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo -i
root@wikisrv:~# su - wikiproj
wikiproj@wikisrv:~$ cd /srv/airflow
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$
```

### Preparing the environment
As in the [the Airflow documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/howto/docker-compose/index.html):
```
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ mkdir -p ./dags ./logs ./plugins ./config
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ echo -e "AIRFLOW_UID=$(id -u)" > .env
```
Set up your password:
```
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ chmod 600 .env
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ echo -e "_AIRFLOW_WWW_USER_PASSWORD='Your_Password'" >> .env
```

`docker-compose.yaml` file from 8cb796c

Before running any docker command, this directory should now look like:
```
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ ls -la
total 44
drwxr-xr-x 6 wikiproj wikiproj  4096 Dec 11 15:54 .
drwxr-xr-x 6 root     root      4096 Dec 11 14:55 ..
drwxrwxr-x 2 wikiproj wikiproj  4096 Dec 11 15:54 config
drwxrwxr-x 2 wikiproj wikiproj  4096 Dec 11 15:54 dags
-rw-rw-r-- 1 wikiproj wikiproj 12944 Dec 11 15:53 docker-compose.yaml
-rw------- 1 wikiproj wikiproj    60 Dec 11 15:43 .env
drwxrwxr-x 2 wikiproj wikiproj  4096 Dec 11 15:54 logs
drwxrwxr-x 2 wikiproj wikiproj  4096 Dec 11 15:54 plugins
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$
```

### ONLY THE FIRST TIME: Initialize the database
```
cl@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ sudo docker compose up airflow-init
```
Warning:
```
airflow-init-1  | The container is run as root user. For security, consider using a regular user account.
```
Many messages pop up in the terminal, and finally you see:
```
airflow-init-1 exited with code 0
```

### Starting Airflow
```
cl@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ sudo docker compose up -d
```

In my setup, this takes approx. 2 minutes.

Open the web browser and log in using user `airflow` and the password from the `.env` file. **Note that as this connection is not encrypted, the password and all further information that is entered could be eavesdropped.** 

We arrive at the start screen.
![Airflow Start Screen](doc/img/install_20251211_airflow_initial_thumb.png)
Especially the list of DAGs is still empty:
![Airflow DAGs](doc/img/install_20251211_airflow_initial2_thumb.png)

### Adding the DAGs
Let's add the DAGs for this project.

First of all pack the needed files into a tar archive.
```
cl@wikisrv:~/work/wiki-eventstreamer/import_and_merge/airflow_dags$ tar -cf /tmp/airflow_dags.tar .
```

Drop the DAGs into the correct place and check the configuration (file from git commit id ac71132):
```
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow/dags$ tar -xf /tmp/airflow_dags.tar
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow/dags$ cat load_streamdump_cfg.py
from pathlib import Path

def get_cfg():
    cfg = {
        # data directory seen from INSIDE of the Docker container
        'DATADIR': Path('/mnt/'),
        'DB_CONN_ID': 'wikidb',
    }
    return cfg
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow/dags$ ls -l
total 24
-rw-rw-r-- 1 wikiproj wikiproj 1703 Dec 11 12:30 filedb_util.py
-rw-rw-r-- 1 wikiproj wikiproj  206 Dec 11 15:59 load_streamdump_cfg.py
-rw-rw-r-- 1 wikiproj wikiproj 1359 Dec 11 12:30 load_streamdump_finalize.py
-rw-rw-r-- 1 wikiproj wikiproj 3670 Dec 11 12:30 load_streamdump.py
-rw-rw-r-- 1 wikiproj wikiproj 6276 Dec 11 12:30 wikiloader.py
wikiproj@wikisrv:/srv/airflow/dags$
```

Airflow periodically scans the directories, so after some time Airflow should list them under the menu point DAGs.
![Airflow with DAGs detected](doc/img/install_20251211_airflow_initial_thumb.png)

### Set up the DB connection
The value of `DB_CONN_ID` is the ID of the connection that needs to be defined in Airflow.
In the menu on the left side:
Admin -> Connections
On the top-right "Add Connection".
Enter the name `wikidb` and select connection type "Postgres" (it can take a few seconds until the list in the drop-down menu is prepared).
Again, because we are connected to Airflow via HTTP (and not via HTTPS), all data we enter here could be eavesdropped!
![Airflow DB Config](doc/img/install_20251211_airflow_DBconfig1_thumb.png)
![Airflow DB Config](doc/img/install_20251211_airflow_DBconfig2_thumb.png)

This is the only connection needed, in particular no file-system-related connections need to be set up as the current version of the script (as of 2025-Dec) assumes that everything is running on the local filesystem.

### Adjusting the permissions of the data directory
At the data directory was not existing and but was defined as volume in the `docker-compose.yaml` file of Airflow, it was created with owner `root`.

This needs to be adjusted:
```
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo chown wikidata:wikidata /srv/wikidata/in
cl@wikisrv:~$ sudo chmod 750 /srv/wikidata/in
cl@wikisrv:~$ ls -ld /srv/wikidata/in
drwxr-x--- 2 wikidata wikidata 4096 Dec 11 14:55 /srv/wikidata/in
cl@wikisrv:~$
```

### Optional: Checking the permission structure for file access
For the data ingestion process to work, it is crucial that the files containing the stream dumps can be accessed from within the Airflow containers.

For this check, let's identify the container running the worker:
```
CONTAINER ID   IMAGE                  COMMAND                  CREATED         STATUS                            PORTS                                              NAMES
5b9002effb13   apache/airflow:3.1.3   "/usr/bin/dumb-init …"   2 minutes ago   Up 6 seconds (health: starting)   8080/tcp                                           airflow-airflow-worker-1
[..]
```

To check the directory mapping: drop a file and then launch a shell inside of one of the running containers
```
cl@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ sudo touch /srv/wikidata/in/hallo
cl@wikisrv:/srv/airflow$ sudo docker exec -it airflow-airflow-worker-1 /bin/bash
default@5b9002effb13:/opt/airflow$ id
uid=1002(default) gid=0(root) groups=0(root),1001
default@5b9002effb13:/opt/airflow$ ls -l /mnt/
total 0
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 0 Dec 11 15:37 hallo
default@5b9002effb13:/opt/airflow$
```
As expected, the file that was placed on the host in directory `/srv/wikidata/in` appears inside the container in the path `/mnt` and there is permission to enter the directory.

### Database Connection Test
To check the DB connection without launching any importer DAGs, a new DAG `db_conntest.py` was created while writing this installation guide.
It was dropped into the directory `/srv/airflow/dags`.
![Airflow Conntest DAG](doc/img/install_20251211_airflow_DBconntest1_thumb.png)

You can manually trigger the DAG
![Airflow Conntest DAG](doc/img/install_20251211_airflow_DBconntest2_thumb.png)
and inspect the log to see that everything worked.
![Airflow Conntest DAG](doc/img/install_20251211_airflow_DBconntest3_thumb.png)
![Airflow Conntest DAG](doc/img/install_20251211_airflow_DBconntest4_thumb.png)

To demonstrate what happens if the DB connection does not work, I changed the password in the configuration definition, and then the triggered DAG run fails.
![Airflow Conntest DAG](doc/img/install_20251211_airflow_DBconntest_testbadpass_thumb.png)
