doc/azure_cfg/README.md, before:

# Azure Deployment Notes
## Firewall Configuration
External access to the database is protected by multiple layers:
* A key component of the interfacing between the Internet and the internal database server is a `pgbouncer` installation that is configured to allow access only for one specific account with read-only database access. In addition, the database connection uses TLS for encryption.
* Firewalling permits access only from Azure-related source IP addresses. For this purpose, Microsoft provides a lists of IPv4 addresses that are updated on a weekly basis.

## Streamlit Application
For the streamlit application, using special Docker image built using git commit ID 36a8e76 (2026-01-06, 23:17).

After building the image we need to upload it to the Azure Container Registry (ACR):
```
$ docker tag streamlit:latest cldemo-<redacted>.azurecr.io/streamlit:v1
$ docker image push cldemo-<redacted>.azurecr.io/streamlit:v1
```

## Actual Deployment
Once this is complete, it is time to launch the application:
```
$ az container create --resource-group myResourceGroup --file deploy-streamlit-apache2.yaml
```
(Internal note: used `.7z` file from int. repo, commit id 780d7cc).

Commit message:

doc: more infos describing Apache2 rev proxy config

doc/azure_cfg/README.md, after:

# Azure Deployment Notes
## Firewall Configuration
External access to the database is protected by multiple layers:
* A key component of the interfacing between the Internet and the internal database server is a `pgbouncer` installation that is configured to allow access only for one specific account with read-only database access. In addition, the database connection uses TLS for encryption.
* Firewalling permits access only from Azure-related source IP addresses. For this purpose, Microsoft provides a lists of IPv4 addresses that are updated on a weekly basis.

## Streamlit Application
For the streamlit application, using special Docker image built using git commit ID 36a8e76 (2026-01-06, 23:17).

After building the image we need to upload it to the Azure Container Registry (ACR):
```
$ docker tag streamlit:latest cldemo-<redacted>.azurecr.io/streamlit:v1
$ docker image push cldemo-<redacted>.azurecr.io/streamlit:v1
```

## Apache2 Reverse Proxy
This is using git commit ID 12dbcf2 from the [Apache2 reverse proxy repository](https://github.com/christoph-lechner/apache2_revproxy)

Building the Docker image (cwd is the root directory of the cloned Apache2 reverse proxy repo).
```
$ docker build -t apache2-revproxy:latest .
$ cd docker_img_with_SSLkeys/
./docker_img_with_SSLkeys$ sudo docker build -t apache2-revproxy-with-keys:latest .
```

Adding the tags and uploading to Azure Container Registry (ACR):
```
docker tag apache2-revproxy-with-keys:latest cldemo-a3g7cuhrebejgdc6.azurecr.io/apache2-revproxy-with-keys:v1
docker image push cldemo-a3g7cuhrebejgdc6.azurecr.io/apache2-revproxy-with-keys:v1
```

## Actual Deployment
Once this is complete, it is time to launch the application:
```
$ az container create --resource-group myResourceGroup --file deploy-streamlit-apache2.yaml
```
(Internal note: used `.7z` file from int. repo, commit id 780d7cc).
